So this next chapter is on exceptions, and
an exception is an event
that occurs due to an error.
So we've run a few programs and
we try some really wild things and
I told you all that's going to crash.
Those crashes are called exceptions.
They disrupt the normal
flow of the program,
everything halts, and
you get an error, okay?
With exceptions like this one,
this code compiles, right?
There are no errors,
there are no warnings.
However, if we were to run this, we would
get an error when the loop attempts
to access index three of this array
because there is no index three, right?
I have 0, 1, and 2 in this array.
This is saying while i is less than 4, so
when it tries to do when i is equal to 3,
an exception will be thrown,
and the specific exception
would be an
ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException, all right?
The program would crash,
it would not continue running after that.
So it halts the execution of the program.
So we're going to create a new program
where we're gonna handle some exceptions
within our code versus letting them
just interrupt the flow of the program.
And in this program,
we're gonna create a new file.
So this will also give us a little
dabbling into working with external
resources, and we're gonna handle any of
the exceptions that it may throw, okay?
So in IntelliJ, [LAUGH] we're
going to create a new package,
and we'll call this exemptions.
Within exception,
let's create a new class,
and we'll just call it ExceptionHandling.
Let's create our main.
I'm just gonna do everything in
here if you don't mind, all right?
Okay, so we got enough going on.
[LAUGH] So we're gonna create a, well,
we're gonna try to create a new file.
In order to make a file,
we are gonna use the file class as
provided to us by Java
in the java.io package.
We'll name this file,
and we'll say new File.
So this is essentially
creating a file object,
not an actual file on the file system.
That makes sense.
But you can point it to the path name
where the file exists on the system.
Let's give it something
that does not exist,
because that's the kinda stuff
that throws exceptions, okay?
So we're gonna say, all right,
what about look inside of
this resources folder for
a file called nonexistent.txt.
All right, now, and
if we wanted to create this, it's okay
that this file doesn't exist, that's fine.
We could use the file object
to actually create a new file.
So there's this method
called createNewFile.
And notice we have an error right here.
What this error says is
that there's an unhandled
exception called a java.io.IOException.
So it is already anticipating that, hey,
this method could possibly
throw an exception.
If you're gonna call this method, you got
to handle the exception in your code.
So there's a couple of ways
that you can handle it.
One way is by using a try-catch block.
So you try something that has
the potential of throwing an exception.
If that exception is thrown,
you use a catch block to catch it and
kinda basically mitigate or
at least end the program gracefully
without just an exception being thrown.
So how we'll do this is by writing
the word try and a set of curly braces,
and then anything that you want to try
that might possibly throw an exception,
you will add it inside of the try block,
okay?
After try is where we would
write the catch block.
When you write catch, you need a set
of parentheses and inside of here,
you specify which exception
that you are going to catch.
So this was throwing an IOException.
That's the exception
that I'd like to catch.
You give it a name.
So we'll just call it e by convention, and
notice that error has now gone away
because I provided a framework for
catching the exception
should it be thrown.
All right, so when I catch this exception,
for now I just want to exit gracefully.
So I'm gonna just print
out something like,
sorry, an error occurred.
And then that's it, right?
So let's just run this much.
Okay, now, this exception was thrown,
not because nonexistent.txt doesn't exist,
cuz we said create a new file.
But because resources to
the directory doesn't exist, so
it can't create that new file with
the directory not even being there.
So I don't know that, right?
I just said, sorry, an error occurred.
There are some methods available on the
exception that will provide more detail.
So for example, instead of saying, sorry,
an error occurred, I could say,
actually print the message.
So maybe I'll do that,
and then say e.getMessage.
This will give me the error message
that was returned with the exception.
So boom, now I have much more context.
It says, sorry, an error occurred, and now
it's specifying no such file or directory.